---
---
import Admonition from 'react-admonitions';

Welcome to the start of a new series of blog posts centred around the Hamlet Azure provider. In each article will showcase a new hamlet component type and how it has been implemented by the Azure provider plugin. Along the way we'll review some unique Infrastructure-as-Code challenges that hamlet addresses as well as deep dive into some of its features. 

These articles are intended for audiences just starting out with either Azure, hamlet or Infrastructure-as-Code in general, so we'll be starting from the basics. The intent is to build on the topics covered in previous articles exploring more advanced topics as we progress.

<Admonition type="tip" title="Applicable to all hamlet providers!">
  These articles use the Azure plugin provider to illustrate the broader hamlet approach to opionionated "Solution-as-Code". Though the implementations will differ by provider, hamlet features that we cover are applicable to all hamlet providers.
</Admonition>

Before we dive too far in to templates, today we'll cover off some Azure Resource Manager basics so we have some groundwork to build on in the upcoming articles.

First up - lets take a look at the `template.json` file structure. The template file is the bare minimum required for an Azure Resource Manager deployment and so it is the structure that we are not just going to have hamlet reproduce for us, but populate.

## Template File

```json
// template.json
{
  "$schema": "https://schema.management.azure.com/schemas/2019-04-01/deploymentTemplate.json#",
  "parameters": {  },
  "variables": {  },
  "resources": [  ],
  "outputs": {  }
}
```

<Admonition type="note" title="Abbreviated snippets">
  In order to keep examples readable, code snippets will be trimmed of non-essential content.
</Admonition>

Each section is summed as follows:

**$schema**
> This template property tells ARM at deployment time which template schema that the content within will conform to. This will rarely change, but when it does we want hamlet templates to be consistent. The resources defined within will not deploy if their schema version is incompatible with the template structure itself.

**parameters**
> Much like in most programming languages, parameters defined in this section determine what parameters can be passed to the template, if they have a default value, and what the *type* the value must be. Parameter values can assigned directly in the template or more commonly they are defined within a `template.json` file, and a corresponding `parameters.json` file in the same directory is used to pass values into the template. 

```json
// example parameter.json
{
  "$schema": "https://schema.management.azure.com/schemas/2019-04-01/deploymentParameters.json#",
  "contentVersion": "1.0.0.0",
  "parameters": {
      "hamletioParameter" : "example"
  }
}
```
>This would pass the `template.json` in the same directory a parameter called "hamletioParameter" with a value of "example".
>
>Typically in ARM what this allows you to do is to seperate out secure or personal values for a template and then share the template/parameters files someone else. Then in order to use the template they just fill in the parameters with their own values. In hamlet however, templates are generated and re-generated as needed, so we use them a little differently. Parameters will be covered in more detail in a future post.

```json
// example parameter within template.json
{
  "parameters": {
    "hamletioParameter" : {
        "type" : "string",
        "defaultValue": "https://hamlet.io"
    }
  }
}
```

**variables**
>Unlike parameters that can have default values and be passed in from another file, variables must be defined within the template. Where they shine however is that they can be used to perform rudimentary logic to determine their value. Common use-cases might be to join two parameters values together to form a new value. 
>
>In hamlet, we don't use variables very often because hamlet will typically perform the underlying logic. Using that same example, as the template generation engine, hamlet knows what parameter 1 and parameter 2 are, so can join them together and then hard-code parameter3.
>
>Instead, where hamlet will generally use variables is in combination with special ARM functions that only occur at run-time. That's a rather advanced topic though, so we'll cover that off in another post.

**resources**
>The primary focus of the template - Resources. This section can be populated by a list of cloud resource definitions. Resources have a standard top-level structure (schema) just as the template file does, however each differs by what properties can be set on a given resource.

- [ARM Templates reference](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/templates/)

> In hamlet, there are a few minor changes to the way resources are defined from how you would create the file if manually authoring it. 

1. Sub-resources are always defined as their own resource, rather than presented within the structure of another resource.

```json
example - nested resource vs non-nested resource
```


2. As a solution changes over time, hamlet will add and remove resources from any resultant templates accordingly. Because of this, many of the quality-of-life features of template authorship - such as looping over a resource a number of times to create N copies of it - are unnecessary. Such a loop would enable a template author to ensure consistency and save time when updating the template, however as hamlet does this all for us, such features would unnecessarily complicate the templates. This does mean that hamlet generated templates are longer in length but also far simpler to read.

**outputs**
>tba